# teacher_assessment
An analysis of teacher certifications and evaluations

### Findings
* Before 1990, teachers who passed their initial certification exams generally performed better on performance evaluations throughout their careers. The mean evaluation score of those who passed the certification assessment in the same calendar year as they completed training was 70%, compared with 60% for those who did not pass. The gap in median scores was even higher: 72% vs. 60%, respectively.
* Although the education board changed the certification process in 1990 to increase the rigor of the process, it is unclear whether the new test is more stringent than the prior one. The overall proportion of teachers that passed the certification exam on the first try was lower after 1990, but a closer examination of the data casts doubt on that conclusion. Data anomalies in 1991, 1993, and 1995 skew the results as the pass rate was 0% in these years. (It is possible the board did not administer the test these years, or the data were somehow corrupted.) When anomalous years are removed, the first-time success rate increases to 97%, compared with 94% before the changes.
* A quick cohort analysis of the population's performance scores suggests that they are stable and largely unaffected by the changes in the certification process. At first glance, it appears that the evidence supports teachers' concerns that the requirement to retake the certification exam every five years does not result in higher performance. The overall distribution of evaluation scores for teachers trained in the 1990s is not substantially different from that of the 1980s or 1970s cohort.
* Looking at cohort scores by evaluation year (or career year) illuminates some intriguing trends, however. The median teacher's score trended down in the first ten years of their work life for graduates in the 1970s. The 1980s cohort exhibited declining median scores for five years and a gradual increase in scores after that. In contrast, the 1990s cohort saw a two percentage point increase in the median score directly after year five (following the first maintenance-of-certification exam).
* Performance evaluation scores have been trending upward for seasoned teachers as well. Both the 1970s and the 1980s cohorts saw rising median scores during the 1990s. After two decades of bouncing between 70% and 72%, the median score for both cohorts shifted to the range of 72% to 74%.
* The question remains whether a two percentage point change in the scores is material enough to justify the cost of administering (for the board) and taking the maintenance-of-certification exam (for the teachers). A deeper investigation is required to do the cost-benefit analysis.
